>> I believe that most
parents have good intentions,
and so I don't want anybody
to feel bad about themselves
for thinking they're doing the
right thing with their child.
It begins with
the parents really
looking at their
own relationship
with food and their bodies.
Most of my clients who come
in with eating disorders
can name family members,
parents, grandparents,
who have had their
own eating disorders
and give them that
message early on.
Oh, maybe you shouldn't
have that second helping.
Well, what does
that child believe?
What's wrong with
my eating more?
Is there something
wrong with me?
So it starts with fixing
one's own relationship
with food and body.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> So intuitive eating is a
dynamic interplay of instinct,
emotion, and thought.
It starts with the
dinosaur era where
the brain functioning at
that time was very primitive.
It was the reptilian brain,
and it was pure instinct.
That dinosaur had the
instinct to survive
and would find food, whether it
was a little dinosaur or plants
or whatever that
dinosaur was eating, just
for the purpose of surviving.
No feelings, no thoughts.
As mammals evolved,
there was another layer
of brain functioning
that came about,
and that's called the mammalian
brain or the limbic brain.
Now, the reptilian brain
is right at the brain stem,
and the limbic brain, which
is the seat of emotions
and social behaviors,
sits right on top
of that instinctual matrix.
Pets, they definitely
have feelings.
People know that their pets get
upset if they go out of town.
Animals have feelings
and instincts.
But what differentiates
us as humans
is that we have the neocortex
or the cognitive part
of the brain.
This is the thinking part.
So we have the
instinct to survive.
We have the instinct of hunger,
fullness, what tastes good.
Our emotions can come
in and alter that,
affect our instincts.
And that's where we use the
rational part of the mind
to monitor the emotions, nurture
ourselves, comfort ourselves,
make decisions for
ourselves that are going
to be for our best interest.
So that's what intuitive
eating is from that standpoint.
It's also anti-diet,
weight-inclusive guidelines
for how to tune in
to one's inner wisdom
because we all have
that inner wisdom,
we're born with it,
for the most part.
I'm sure there are
some babies maybe
who have some
developmental problems.
But for the most
part, babies are
born knowing when they're
hungry, and they cry.
And when they're full, they'll
turn their little heads,
and you can't get
more food into them.
And when they start becoming
acquainted with solid foods,
they know what they like, they
know what they don't like.
Now, if that child is brought
up in an intuitive eating
atmosphere, that child stays in
touch with all of those signals
and tends to grow up without
any issues with eating.
Unfortunately, there are many
influences in our society
that pull parents away.
And I will say they
have good intentions
but are often interfering with
that child's intuitive wisdom.
One of the myths
of intuitive eating
is that it's a weight-loss plan.
If I just eat intuitively,
oh, I'm going to be so good,
and I'm going to only
eat when I'm hungry
and stop when I'm full.
And yeah, and then I'm
going to lose weight.
Intuitive eating is
not a weight-loss plan.
It's completely
disconnected to it.
Do people's weight
change sometimes?
Yeah, sometimes, if
they're starting to really
tune in to themselves.
But that's not the goal.
And if people start
thinking about that,
it really disconnects them
from their internal signals
because if they've got in
the back of their mind,
yeah, I can eat
anything, but, well,
if I eat that, I won't
be able to lose weight,
they're back in diet
culture and diet mentality.
And so that is a big myth
that has to be dispelled
because intuitive
eating is really
disconnected from weight loss.
By the way, I was
thinking the other day
that in the phrase
"diet culture,"
there's the word "cult."
It had not occurred to me.
And I thought, yeah, diet
culture is a real cult.
It's this cult of
certain foods are good,
certain foods are bad,
certain foods are healthy,
certain foods are not healthy.
Just the way there's diet
in dietitian, you know?
It's a problem.
So I've really actually
often or mostly called myself
a nutrition therapist
rather than a dietitian
even though I am.
Another method is it's just
about hunger and fullness.
That's what people think.
They don't understand that
there are 10 principles,
and hunger and fullness are
only two of the 10 principles.
And that feeds into the myth
that you can't use intuitive
eating in certain
eating disorders.
I get that all the time.
And it really actually angers
me because, for example,
if a person has anorexia
nervosa and is not really
getting reliable hunger
signals, it's full all the time
because everything's slowed down
in the body, people will say,
well, you can't tell that
person to eat when she's hungry
or he's hungry.
They're never going to eat.
Well, yeah, intuitive
eating isn't just
about hunger and fullness.
So I can work with
someone from the get-go
to look at all the
other parts of it,
to start to make
peace with food,
to start respecting
their bodies,
and eating is a way of
respecting your body.
And looking at emotions, are
you restricting your food
as a way to feel some sense
of control in the world?
So there's satisfaction.
This is a big piece of it.
You can use satisfaction
as a goal in eating.
Probably another myth is
that intuitive eating is just
about eat whatever
you want whenever
you want as much as you want.
Well, that's limited.
It's not simply that.
It's tuning into
how is it feeling?
How does the food taste?
When my friend says to me, if
you tell me I can eat steak,
I'll never stop eating steak.
And so if I can help them
understand the concept
of habituation, and they
see that actually, you'll
get a little sick of
steak if you have it
every night for a month.
There are two main psychological
reasons why diets don't work.
The biggest reason to me,
the most important reason
is that somebody else is
telling you what to do.
It's externalized.
It has no connection with
your inner wisdom at all.
Even if you create
your own diet,
it's based on what
you hear out there
in the universe about
what you shouldn't eat,
what you should eat.
Eventually, that
autonomous part of us
that's part of our developmental
life from early on,
from toddlerhood, when the baby
first starts to learn around 18
months that it's no longer
attached to its mother
and is a person of its own
and goes around the house
and wants to pick its own toys
and eat what it likes and not
eat what it doesn't like,
and the favorite word is no.
Well, this is this
developmental stage
that is the beginning
of the development
of the ego, the healthy ego.
And it re-emerges
big-time in teenagehood.
Teenagers, adolescents are
all about achieving autonomy,
individuating,
separating from home,
and doing some things sometimes
that their parents don't
want them to do.
Well, that part of us--
I'm very much interested
in inner child work,
and that part of us
is, in my opinion,
with us our entire lives.
I know all about
my little teenager,
my little toddler in me.
I know when she's activated.
And so to me, a
diet is ultimately
going to fail
because ultimately,
a person with a healthy
ego is going to balk at it
and say, no, I'm
not going to do it.
Unfortunately, that person
feels bad about themself.
And when I have
clients that come in
and say, oh, I'm such a
failure at dieting, I'll say,
no, you're not a
failure at dieting.
You're a success
in ego development.
And I tell them that
someone who has not
developed a very strong ego
is the kind of person who's
going to be pulled into a cult.
And I will say to that person,
but you don't appear to me
to be the kind of person that
would be pulled into a cult.
And normally, they go, no.
No way.
That would never happen.
And so that strong ego
is asserting autonomy
by not staying on the diet.
So that's, to me, the
fundamental reason
why diets don't work.
The other important part
of it is deprivation.
Pretty much on
any diet, a person
is going to be told how much to
eat, when to eat, what to eat.
And typically, they're not going
to get what they really want.
And for a while, they
can hold on to that
because they have
all these fantasies
of what will happen if they--
well, the diet is always geared
to weight loss and the
fantasies of what will
happen if they lose weight.
And along the way,
that deprivation
just increases and
increases to the point
that they can't take it anymore.
And they'll start to
eat something that they
haven't had for a while.
And boom, they feel
out of control.
Then they start to feel
guilty because they
think they shouldn't do it,
and they've broken their diet.
And it goes back and forth
until they find the next diet.
It's like a seesaw, up and
down, guilt and deprivation.
We really want to be
at peace, and that's
what's going to give us
the opportunity to have
the total sense of health.
The more you worry
about what you eat,
the higher your stress
levels, the higher
your cortisol levels.
And that's really what's
more dangerous for your body
than any particular sweet roll.
And some things we have no
control over, they're genetic.
It doesn't matter what we eat
or don't eat or what we do.
It's just going to be,
like my cholesterol levels.
[LAUGHS]
There's no rules in
intuitive eating.
Some people like to
take intuitive eating
and turn it into the intuitive
eating diet or the hunger
fullness diet.
They're looking for
something to control them.
It's not that at all.
There are more
guidelines to help
you get the most satisfaction
and pleasure out of eating.
It's being gentle with yourself.
It's being compassionate
toward the fact
that you may have only had
food to cope because you
didn't know any other way.
Kids who maybe grow up in homes
where there's a lot of abuse,
food is a comfort.
And we all need to be able
to make peace with the fact
that food can be comforting
and to not judge ourselves
if we want to get
comfort from food.
And the more we
can stay present,
the more you can
feel that comfort
and the more you can get
the pleasure from the food.
Those of us who are able to get
the foods that we want and eat
as much of it are
very privileged.
Intuitive eating is a privilege.
Not everybody is able to be an
intuitive eater when they don't
know where they're going to
get the next amount of food
that they need.
In an environment
of poverty, that's
going to affect a person's
health and well-being
because they just
don't have access.
They don't have
access to health care.
access to the food
that they need just
to nourish themselves.
There's so much
judgment out there.
People judge,
let's say, a mother
who only has enough money to
buy fast food for her children.
Well, let's not
judge that person.
That may be the only thing
that she has access to.
And at least she's getting
some food in their bodies.
You have to work on all
those judgments that people
carry around, all those
years and years of judgment.
It really takes you
away from the tuning in.
So it's about staying present,
really listening, listening
to those hunger
signals, noticing
when you're starting to get
full and really noticing
whether the food
is tasting as good
as it did in the beginning.
I often ask a
client who comes in,
would you eat a peanut butter
and jelly sandwich on your way
to your favorite restaurant?
And inevitably,
the person is going
to say, well, no, of course not.
And I'll say, why?
Well, it won't taste as good.
And so it's that
intuitive knowledge
that food just tastes better
when you have some hunger.
And conversely, if
you're starving,
if you haven't been
eating all day long,
and you're presented
with food, you
can't really
appreciate it or stay
present because the
survival part of the brain,
the instinctual part of
the brain, reptilian part,
sends out chemicals to get
you to get as much food,
as many calories, as
many carbohydrates
as you can to keep
the brain functioning.
And in that process,
you can't really
notice how good,
the food tastes.
When I ask people to pay
attention to satisfaction,
it really informs looking
at hunger and fullness
and how that is connected
with satisfaction.
And that's where you
start to tune in.
It's really listening.
And I say again,
staying present.
We are so distracted
by so many things.
People will get on their
computers with their meal.
And before they know
it, the food's gone.
They didn't even notice
that they ate it.
It's looking at what's the
environment for which you
can get the most
satisfaction out of eating.
That doesn't mean
you have to sit there
and just stare at your food.
It just means paying attention
to what's going to distract you
and what's not going
to distract you
from getting that
satisfaction and tuning
in to that hunger and fullness.
Permission is a huge
piece of intuitive eating.
It's permission to eat,
enjoy it, and notice.
Is it still enjoyable?
Are you starting to feel
physically uncomfortable?
And if you are, sometimes
I will tell you,
you could be in Paris in
some incredible little cafe
and don't know that you're
ever going to be there again.
And it's so good, and you're
not going to bring half of it
home to eat the next day.
So you may eat it
all, no judgment.
I like to say, come from
a place of curiosity,
not judgment, be
self-compassionate.
Self-compassion is a big
part of intuitive eating.
So sure, go for it.
You walk away stuffed.
Who cares?
If it's happening every
day at all of your meals,
then it's something to look at.
There's a point at which
when we're eating, especially
if there's an emotional
attachment to food-- which
I think is a gift.
I feel sad for people who
have no joy in eating.
There's a point at which if
you're eating a wonderful meal,
and the amount of
food on that plate
is more than your
body needs, there's
this point at which it
doesn't taste as good,
and you're starting to feel
full, not stuffed but full.
And a sadness emerges.
And that's not, to me, deep,
emotional pain like depression
or something that
someone goes through
in very difficult times.
It's a momentary
feeling that shows up.
And it's anytime we are stopping
something that's enjoyable,
we feel a moment of sadness.
The biggest one for me is books.
I'm a real book reader.
And at the end of
a wonderful book,
you know, I'm getting
close to the end,
and I want to know how it ends.
And then I'm so
sad that it's over.
So I think it's very human to
have that moment of sadness.
And I help people accept it,
stay with it for a moment,
and recognize they're going to
get to eat again several times
a day.
Move on, do something else, and
it, you know, it dissipates.
We're all meant to move.
If we can, if we
have the privilege
of being able to move our
bodies, we are meant to move.
Can we find a way
that feels joyous?
What can you do, that's
going to feel good to you?
And it doesn't have to be--
and in fact, it's often a
good idea if it isn't-- some
programmed exercise.
There's a concept called
NEAT, non-exercise activity
thermogenesis.
And what that means is
how you move your body
without it being exercised.
If I run up the
stairs, that's NEAT.
If I'm bringing groceries in
from the car, that's NEAT.
Movement can simply
be just those things
that you do in your life
that are part of life,
and they help you feel better.
So it's helping people look
at what their belief is
about movement,
whether they believe
it's not worth it if you're not
sweating and haven't run five
miles, whether they're resisting
it because as children, they
were pushed to exercise
because really, they knew
that their parents
had an agenda,
or they were afraid they
were gaining too much weight.
Is it that they're
getting older,
and they can't do the
same kinds of things
they did when they
were young, and they
don't want to face their age?
Is it that they have some sort
of disability that's come up,
and they can't do what
they used to be able to do?
Let's look at what
is causing you
to resist this incredible,
wonderful experience that each
of us can have in
any way we can.
There are certain things
that are philosophical,
certain things that have deep
religious meaning to people.
And if that is
important to them,
and they choose to, for example,
in Orthodox Judaism where
people are not supposed to eat
meat and milk at the same time,
it can be a struggle if they're
trying to make peace with food.
On the other hand, it
means a lot to them
to keep the commands that
they've committed to,
so they actually don't
feel deprived in that area.
All I know about specifically
is my own religion,
but I know that a
rabbi will tell someone
who is healing from
an eating disorder
that they don't have to follow
the rules during that period,
that what's most important is
that they nourish themselves,
not to fast on the Jewish
holiday of Yom Kippur
where you fast all day.
Well, absolutely,
my rabbi will say,
if you have an eating
disorder, you eat, please.
Some people are very strongly
philosophically vegan.
And they're not really
feeling deprived
because this is something
that has deep meaning
to them at a spiritual level.
It's only when people are trying
to eliminate certain things
just because they
think they should
or because they'll lose
weight that it's a problem.
So we have to have respect
for people's philosophy
and religion.
I was at a dinner one
night among friends.
Four of them started
talking about,
ugh, I've just got to
lose that 10 pounds.
Or, it was great at
my wedding, but now
I've gained weight since then.
And I stood up, and
I said to them--
they're all good friends.
And I said, this has to stop.
Each of you is doing so many
wonderful things in the world
and is so special
in so many ways.
Why are you continuing to
beat yourself up for weight?
I mean, really,
take a look at that.
It's ruining your life.
So I do speak up wherever
I can even among friends.
And it makes me sad.
It makes me sad that so many
people are holding themselves
back in so many ways because
they think their bodies don't
meet up to certain standards.
There's so many wonderful things
to do in life and think about.
And so much of mental
energy is taken up in,
oh no, I ate too much
of that, or, my body
is it's not fitting
into that pair of pants
that I wore last year.
Let's be a little more
generous with ourselves
in terms of the way
we look at ourselves
and just appreciate that we
have a body and that we're alive
and what can our
bodies do and get away
from that perfectionism.
[THEME MUSIC]